---
uip: "0109"
title: Essential Desks
description: Introduce a distinction between essential and non-essential desks, which block and do not block OTAs, respectively.
author: Philip Monk (philipcmonk)
status: Last Call
type: Standards Track
category: Kernel
created: 2023-07-26
---

## Abstract

We commonly install an Urbit app on a whim, and then when a kelvin
update arrives, it blocks the upgrade because it's not yet compatible
with the new version.  This frustrates the user and lowers the general
health of the network by causing many ships to fall out of date.  We
propose introducing a distinction between essential desks and
non-essential desks, where only essential desks will block upgrades.
Newly installed desks will default to non-essential.

## Motivation

An important part of the experience of using Urbit is installing apps
fearlessly: you should be able to install a desk without worrying that
it will compromise the integrity of the system or cause problems down
the line.

One of the handful of reasons why this isn't currently the case (along
with a lack of a security model, which is not addressed here) is that
when you install a desk, you're implicitly telling the system that this
desk is very important, and it should never cause it to stop working
without explicit consent from the user.  Especially, this means that a
kelvin upgrade cannot occur if that desk is not compatible with the new
kelvin.  This commonly stops kelvin upgrades from proceeding
automatically.

It's very bad for kelvin updates to be delayed for very long.  The user
will stop getting updates even on their other desks (since those updates
are for the new kelvin), and so networked apps will generally stop
working over time.  This also makes it difficult for developers to fix
problems they find in their desks (including security problems), and
even bugs we find in the core system.  This also introduces a
significant burden for hosting providers if they want to provide a
consistenly good user experience to users, since many of their users
will fall out of date.

This situation arises because we don't want to suspend a user's app just
to upgrade the system -- after all, Urbit exists to run apps, not apps
for Urbit.  If the main app that a user cares about is suspended to run
an upgrade, their experience is significantly diminished, even if it's
only for a couple days before the developer updates the app to be
compatible with the new kelvin.

## Specification

We propose introducing a distinction between "essential" and
"non-essential" desks.  An essential desk has the current semantics: if
the desk is not compatible with the new kelvin, block the update until
it becomes compatible.  A non-essential desk has the opposite semantics:
if the desk is not compatible with the new kelvin, suspend the desk and
continue with the update.  As currently happens, when that desk receives
an update that makes it compatible with the new kelvin, it should
automatically revive.

A further consideration is what to do when a desk declares compatibility
with the new kelvin, but when you attempt to apply the update, it
crashes.  Currently, this will block the update, and that should
continue to be the case for essential desks.  For non-essential desks,
a crash should only suspend that desk, and the rest of the update should
continue.  This suggests that non-essential desks should be upgraded in
deferred events instead of the main upgrade event (see `%held` for a
possible mechanism).

Finally, we must consider which desks are marked essential.  They will
have the following triggers:

- `%base` is always essential
- A desk which is present during boot will be marked essential
- A desk which is installed after boot will be marked non-essential
- A desk which is suspended (whether to unblock an OTA or for another
  reason) will be marked non-essential
- A desk can be marked essential manually by the user with a command
  such as `|mark-desk %desk %essential`.

## Rationale

Another way to attack the problem is to reduce the frequency of breaking
updates.  For example, we could more intelligently recognize when a new
kelvin doesn't actually break an app without requiring the developer to
declare compatibility.

However, even with fewer breaking changes, this proposal is still useful
for truly breaking changes, which are still fairly common.  It's also a
fundamentally correct change, in the sense that it more accurately
models how users actually think about their apps.

## Backwards Compatibility

The main consideration is what to do about apps that are already
installed when this change is released.  The most conservative choice
would be to mark all existing desks as essential.  We think it would be
better to instead recognize a specific set of desks to mark as
essential, since this will most closely approximate what would have
happened if this existed all along.  It also will make updates the most
smooth going forward for the current fleet.

That set of desks will match the current official pill: `%base`
(implicitly), `%garden`, `%landscape`, `%groups`, and `%talk`.

## Security Considerations

No particular considerations come to mind, other than that this will
generally keep more ships up-to-date, which is good for security.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
