---
uip: "0119"
title: Pretty Printer Improvements
description: Make the Hoon pretty printer robust and customizable
author: ~sidnym-ladrut (@sidnym-ladrut), ~fidwed-sipwyn
status: Final
type: Standards Track
category: Hoon
created: 2024-01-20
---

## Abstract

The Hoon pretty printer (i.e. [standard library 5c][stdlib-5c]) is broadly
responsible for transforming `$type` and `$vase` nouns into `$tank`
equivalents, generally for the purpose of rendering these nouns in a
human-legible format. While its current implementation admirably performs this
task for nearly all simple and semi-complex nouns, it suffers from performance
and legibility problems for common nontrivial inputs such as meta-`$vase`
nouns, `%lull` types, and noun comparisons (e.g. via `+dext:nest:ut`).
Additionally, the pretty printer's limited set of customization options forces
all output to exist at one of two levels of abstraction: extremely verbose (the
default) or extremely terse (for types annotated with `$+`). This proposal
contains an array of suggestions to address these deficiencies in an iterative
and user-oriented manner.

## Motivation

There are numerous simple pretty printer invocations that render a ship
unusable or produce largely illegible results. The following is a short list of
common representative examples:

1. `!>(*)`, `+<..`: Processes for several minutes before ultimately crashing the
   ship with a `recover: dig: meme` error.
2. `->:!>(*noun)`: Fails to print any output, exiting with a `dojo: failed to
   process input` error.
3. `^-((unit dome:clay) *dome:clay)`: Produces nearly 900 lines of output for a
   difference spanning a single line.

The lack of per-type printing customization also makes it difficult to tune
the pretty printer's level of detail to the user's operative level of
abstraction. This presents problems most commonly for developers at both ends
of the abstraction range (i.e. core and app developers), who encounter troubles
with outputs for nouns like:

1. `-:!>(*peer-state:ames)`: Prints `#t/#peer-state`, which is unhelpful for a
   core developer attempting to debug/inspect this structure at a nontrivial
   level of detail.
2. `^-((tree [@t @]) (malt ~[[';' 1] [':' 2] ['!' 3]]))`: Prints the tree using
   set-like `{…}` syntax, which makes it difficult for a core developer that
   wants to see the node ordering of the underlying tree structure.
3. `mint:ut`: Prints the `+mint` arm using the pretty printer's `<X.abc …>`
   summary syntax, which is difficult to parse for an app developer trying to
   determine the function's signature (doccords helps with this somewhat,
   but cannot easily print door arms).
4. `^-(hoon 1)`: Prints:
    ```hoon
      -need
        ?(
          [p=#1 q=#1]
          ... rest of the hoon type here ...
          [%sggr p=?([p=@tas q=#1] @tas) q=#1]
          [%sgwt p=@ud q=#1 r=#1 s=#1]
          [%sgcb p=#1 q=#1]
          [%sgbr p=#1 q=^#1.#hoon]
        )
        -have.@ud 
    ```
    instead of:
    ```hoon
      -need.#hoon  ::  $hoon is named with $+
      -have.@ud
    ```

## Specification

> Joe (`~master-morzod`) had some interesting ideas for how to rewrite the pretty
> printer in a way that might be easier—and maybe even more principled—involving
> using the `%hint` type for types, treating that like a mark, and then
> allowing you to write a function that describes how data of that mark could be
> pretty printed. Then, you could write a pretty printer where the logic of the
> printer itself doesn't know anything about those (marks) and is a very dumb
> genric—and that could be really nice.
>
> – Ted Blackman (`~rovnys-ricfer`), ["Developer Week: Core Dev AMA (2022)"][cdama-22]

- Rewrite and replace the [`+us` door][stdlib-5c] to leverage the existing
  `[%hint [%know mark=@tas] …]` type structure to enable `%mark`-like type
  identification and corresponding custom printing functions.
  - The `+us` door new sample will consist of a maximum depth `dep`, a
    verbosity setting `veb` and a pretty printer map `pin`:
    ```hoon
    ++  us
    =>  |%
      +$  tase  (each type vase)                        ::  type/vase
      +$  meta                                          ::  recursion metadata
        $~  [~ ~ 30 %base ~]                            ::
        $:   saw=(set tase)                             ::  recursive types
             ids=(map type @)                           ::  types id
             dep=@ud                                    ::  maximum depth
             veb=?(%base %most %lest)                   ::  default verbosity
             pin=(map term ppin)                        ::  print overrides
        ==                                              ::
      +$  base  $-([tase meta] (unit [meta tank]))      ::  base printer
      +$  ppin  $-([tase meta base] (unit [meta tank])) ::  custom printer
      --
      ::
      |%
      ::  … arms start here …
    ```
    - `dep` will be decremented each time that a `%cell` is found, until
            it reaches zero, at which point printing will stop with `[...]`.
            The maximum depth was primarily introduced to prevent the common
            issue of the PP hanging for minutes and even causing out of memory
            errors, observed when trying to print very large outputs (e.g. cores
            as raw nouns).

    - `veb` is the verbosity setting used by the pretty printer and has three
            flavors:

    | %base                   | %most                          | %lest           |
    |-------------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------|
    | (map @tas @ud)          | ?(%~ [n=[p=@t q=@ud] l=[...]]) | #t/#map         |
    |  u(1)                   | [~ u=1]                        | u(1)            |
    | {[p=a q=1] [p=b q=2]}   | [n=[p='b' q=2] l=~ r=[...]]    | {[a 1] [b 2]}   |

    `%base`: Search for a custom printer (ppin), if not found, fallback to
              the default printer (hardcoded). If the latter is not present,
              perform name substitution (similar to `%lest`).
    `%most`  Ignore hints and prints a more extensive output.
    `%lest`  For types: Aggressive `%know` name substitution for all named
              types (+$). For vases: Hide all faces. Shorter core printing on
              both `type` and `vase` printing.

    - `pin` enumerates a set of type marks and associated printing functions
       that will be called for the types named with `+$` and for all the cases
       of `$type`.
      - The pretty printer gate `$ppin` has the following signature:
        `$-([tase meta base] (unit [meta tank]))`.
        - Where `$tase` is the input to be printed: `(each type vase)`.
        - `$meta` is used to pass some metadata down into the recursion.
        - The `base` argument is the base pretty printer gate that will be
          used by `+us`, which is passed to each `$ppin` in order to enable
          recursive `$tank` building.
        -  The output is wrapped in a unit because sometimes we return ~ on
           error, allowing the `%fork` printer can continue to the next case
           of the `%fork`.
      - The following is a rough sketch of a `$ppin` gate for the `$unit` type:
        ```hoon
        |=  [inp=tase sen=meta bas=base]
        ^-  (unit [meta tank])
        =+  typ=?-(-.inp %& p.inp, %| p.p.inp)
        ?>  ?=([%fork *] typ)
        =+  yed=(sort ~(tap in p.typ) aor)
        ?>  ?=([* [[%cell * [%face *]] ~]] yed)
        ?-    -.inp
          %&  ::  type
            ?~  res=(bas [%& +<+>+>.yed] sen)  ~
            `[-.u.res [%rose [" " "u(" ")"] +.u.res ~]]
          %|  ::  vase
            (bas inp sen)
        ==
        ```
  - We introduce $+ hints for commonly used types, such as `$set`, `$map`, and
    `$unit`, among others.

  - Create a new gate `+doxx` with signature `$-(type type)` thats used internaly
    by the PP to heuristically annotate the input with `%know` notes for the
    `%list` types (e.g. `tape`, `path`, `wall`, etc.).

  - A new generator `:dojo|pp-config` was introduced, allowing the dev to update
    `%dojo`'s PP config.

  - The +nest arm has been updated to avoid throwing unnecessary hints (as
    mentioned with ^-(hoon 1) above). It also now repeats the error location
    if the output exceeds an arbitrary size of 100 lines (80 characters each).

  - Several default printers have been reworked, including the gate printing,
    which changed its style from `<number-of-arms.hash ...subject>` to
    `$-(input output)`.

## Rationale

- The fixed PP logic is simple and consists of recursively traversing the
  type/vase, and for each case of $type (%atom, %cell, %core, etc.), calling
  the associated printer functions, all of which can technically be overridden
  by a $ppin gate. The dep makes it flexible to constrain outputs on demand,
  while veb allows for general customization. Together, these changes make the
  pretty printer robust and customizable.

## Backwards Compatibility

- Replacing the old pretty printer will break backwards compatibility with any
  code that directly calls the pretty printer's door. However, it will not
  affect code that uses functions such as `+sell/+skol/+duck:ut/+dunk:ut`.
  It may also break code that relies on specific pretty printer outputs.

## Future work

- The `$tank` type could be modified or replaced to be more expressive.
- A good noun diff algorithm could be used to make `test.hoon`'s diffs smaller.

## Acknowledgements

- `~master-morzod` (i.e. @joemfb) for providing architectural sketches.
- `~rovnys-ricfer` (i.e. @belisarius222) for motivating this project.
- `~master-morzod` (i.e. @joemfb), `~rovnys-ricfer` (i.e. @belisarius222), and
  `~datnut-pollen` (i.e. @drbeefsupreme) for providing a wealth of prior art and
  examples in `%/lib/xray/hoon`, `%/lib/language-server/easy-print/hoon`, and
  `%/lib/dprint/hoon` (respectively).

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).


[stdlib-5c]: https://docs.urbit.org/language/hoon/reference/stdlib/5c
[stdlib-ep]: https://github.com/urbit/urbit/blob/develop/pkg/base-dev/lib/language-server/easy-print.hoon
[stdlib-rs]: https://docs.urbit.org/courses/hoon-school/S-math#rs-as-a-door
[cdama-22]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SI_B7H8tSRE&t=3416
