---
uip: 0114
title: OTA approval
description: Kiln can optionally prompt users for approval before applying pending updates
author: ~tinnus-napbus
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Kernel
created: 2023-08-21

---

## Abstract

Kiln subscribes to `+(let)` for the revision number of a desk (a `%w` care).
When it gets the response, it tells Clay to initiate a merge for that revision.

Instead of immediately initiating the merge, it should record the availability
of an update in state & ask the user to approve it by sending a a gift out on a
subscription path. The user can then approve the update in the front-end which
will poke kiln to proceed with the merge.

Kiln should be able to enable global auto-updates, so the user doesn't need to
approve if they don't want to. Individual desks should also be able to be set
to auto/manual, and this should override global settings.

## Motivation

Currently users have little control over updates and don't know when things
have been updated. They can disable updates for a desk, but then don't know if
there have been any further updates they might want to install. Users should
have more control & be notified when updates are available.

## Specification

Kiln should have an extra `?` added to the `sync-state` that tracks whether an
update is available to be merged.

Kiln should have a `?` added to state that enables/disables global auto-merges.

Kiln should have an extra `(unit ?)` added to the `sync-state` that specifies
whether updates should be auto-merged. If null it should fall back to the
global setting.

Kiln should have a poke added that approves & initiates merging of an available
update.

Kiln should have a poke added that sets the global auto-merge flag.

Kiln should have a poke added that sets the
auto-merge flag for a particular sync.

## Rationale

TBD

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Reference Implementation

None

## Security Considerations

No apparent security issues apart from obviously needing to check `=(src our)`
for pokes.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
