---
uip: 0103
title: Persistent Nock Caching
description: Persistent Runtime Caches for Nock Computations
author: ~rovnys-ricfer
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Nock
created: 2023-06-13
---

## Abstract

Modifies Hoon's `~+` rune to emit a new variant of the `%memo` Nock memoization hint that includes a path and is expected to be cached persistently, across multiple Arvo events, by the runtime.

Once this new rune exists, it can replace Arvo's type-check cache for vane activations, Ames performance could be increased by memoizing its packet encoding for re-sends, and Ford could be rewritten as a pure stateless function without caching or dependency tracking.  Runtime Nock caches for the Hoon compiler and parser could also be injected during initial boot as a quickboot mechanism.

## Motivation

Urbit runtimes have more information about timing and memory use than Nock code, enabling better caching semantics.  Hoon's `~+` rune is useful, but its implementation in runtimes is not persistent beyond the current Arvo event -- in Vere, the cache only lives as long as the current "road" (Nock virtualization level).

Complex caching and deduplication systems have emerged in various parts of Arvo that could be replaced by a persistent memoization cache in the runtime.

The hint for memoization should also include a path to tell the runtime which part of the system is running this code, to enable multiple caches that are tuned differently for different kinds of computations.

## Specification

A new dynamic Nock hint format will be added that should be recognized by runtimes.  Written as a raw hint in Hoon, it looks like this, in a simplified Ford-like system that parses and compiles a Hoon source file:

```hoon
++  build
  |=  [sut=vase pax=path tex=cord]
  ^-  vase
  ::
  =/  =hoon
    ~>  %memo./ford/rain  ::  cache parsing
    (rain pax tex)
  ::
  =/  [=type =nock]
    ~>  %memo./ford/mint  ::  cache compilation
    (~(mint ut p.sut) %noun hoon.pile)
  ::
  [type .*(q.sut nock)]
```

The `%memo` hint informs the runtime that the enclosed Nock computation should be cached persistently, and the path indicates which cache to use.  The runtime might have the `/ford/rain` and `/ford/mint` tuned to have different eviction policies, and it might want to keep entries in those two caches with higher priority than entries in other caches.

Syntax for this hint could be a modified version of the `~+` rune that includes the path for this cache:

```hoon
~+  /ford/parse
```

There will be three categories of possible paths:
1. `/`: the empty path (or any atom), which targets the transient cache.
2. `/known/path`: a known path, which targets a specialized cache.
3. `/any/other/path`: an unknown path, which targets the persistent cache.

### Scry Referential Transparency

With persistent caching, it is possible that the same scry request performed
twice could produce two disparate values. Here's how:
```
> (mink [0 !=(~>(%memo.[/foo] .^(* /foo)))] |=(* ``1))
[%0 product=1]
> (mink [0 !=(~>(%memo.[/foo] .^(* /foo)))] |=(* ``2))
[%0 product=1]
```

In the above example, we first bind the scry path `/foo` to `1`, then we bind
it to `2` and see that we still receive the cached value of `1`.

To avoid this, we will add a runtime check that prevents persistent
caching of Nock code that scries:
```
if ( u3R->ski.gul != 0 ) {
  u3z_save_m();
}
```

Note that this prevents userspace code from saving in the persistent cache as well. 
We can enable it in a future upgrade to this system.

## Backward Compatibility

Adding the new `~+` syntax will necessitate a Hoon Kelvin burn.  Since the syntax has changed, all instances of the `~+` rune will need to be replaced.  As of the time of this writing, the urbit/urbit repository contains 85 instances of the `~+` rune, so this is tractable.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
