---
uip: "0129"
title: "Typed Paths with $coin Extensions"
description: "Add %blob and %many to typed paths"
author: ~rovnys-ricfer
status: Stagnant
type: Standards Track
category: Hoon
created: 2024-07-25
---

## Abstract

Hoon's original `path` data structure has syntax and parsing that allows each
element to be a `$coin` data structure: either a typical string-encoded scalar
value, a `%many` string-encoded list of values or a `%blob` string-encoded
"jammed" (serialized) arbitrary noun.  These features are useful for encoding
more complex data structures in paths in a standardized and somewhat
human-readable manner.

The latest conception of a path in Hoon -- a so-called "typed path", called a
`$pith` in the standard library and introducible using provisional `#/foo/bar`
syntax -- lacks these extra encodings, limiting its expressiveness.  This
proposal adds the `$coin` encodings back into typed paths to reclaim the lost
expressivity while retaining the performance and legibility improvements of
typed paths.

## Specification

This is a type definition for a typed `path` with `%many` and `%blob`
extensions.  Description follows.  This does not include parsing or serialization functions.

```hoon
|%
+$  path  (list zeta)
+$  zeta
  $~  [%n ~]
  $@  @tas
  $%  [%many p=(list zeta)]
      [%blob p=*]
      [%ub @ub]  [%uc @uc]  [%ud @ud]  [%ui @ui]
      [%ux @ux]  [%uv @uv]  [%uw @uw]
      [%sb @sb]  [%sc @sc]  [%sd @sd]  [%si @si]
      [%sx @sx]  [%sv @sv]  [%sw @sw]
      [%da @da]  [%dr @dr]
      [%f ?]     [%n ~]
      [%if @if]  [%is @is]
      [%t @t]    [%ta @ta]  ::  @tas
      [%p @p]    [%q @q]
      [%rs @rs]  [%rd @rd]  [%rh @rh]  [%rq @rq]
  ==
--
```

A `path` is a list of `zeta` elements.  Each `zeta` can either be a `@tas`, a
`%many` list of elements, a `%blob` arbitrary noun, or a cell of an atom aura
and value, for any aura that is understood natively by the Hoon language.

```hoon
::  Just like today's typed paths, this typed path
::
#/foo/3/0x4/~2024.7.25
::
::  parses to
::
~[%foo [%ud 3] [%ux 0x4] [%da ~2024.7.25]]
::
::  This typed path takes advantage of the new %blob and %many features:
::
#/baz/~05iggq1/._foo_~~d1_.~-bar~-~-__
::
::  It parses to
::
~[%baz [%blob [33 44]] [%many ~[%foo [%dr ~d1] %many ~[%bar]]]]
```

Note that `%many` elements can contain other `%many` elements recursively,
allowing for arbitrary tree shapes of encoded path elements.  This example's
final `%bar` is doubly coin-encoded due to being inside two nested `%many`
elements.  `%blob` elements can also be nested inside `%many` elements.

## Backwards Compatibility

I think this new typed path should replace the existing typed path, since it
just adds capability -- any typed paths in the existing system, as parsed data
structures or strings, should still work.

Once these new typed paths have been demonstrated more thoroughly, the
provisional `#/` syntax could be replaced by some kind of permanent syntax,
possibly replacing the original `/` path syntax.

## Security Considerations

I am not aware of any security considerations to speak of.  These paths would be
safer if atom sanity was enforced during `;;`, as proposed in the Aura
Renovation UIP, but that is just as true for existing typed paths.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
