---
uip: "0122"
title: "%wild: Stateless jet registration"
description: Propose a new system for deriving jet registrations and hinting which requires no stored state in the interpreter.
author: ~ritpub-sipsyl (@eamsden)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: "Hoon, Nock"
created: 2024-03-25
---

## Abstract

This proposal introduces a stateless approach to jet registration in Nock
interpreters, utilizing a dynamic hint labeled `%wild`. The `%wild` hint
directly contains the necessary slice of "cold state" (labels for nested core
batteries) for the hinted Nock, thereby avoiding issues with state maintenance
and preservation. This approach offers a simple solution to the problems of
state in jet registration.

The `%wild` hint can be composed by Hoon and can be implemented using existing
information in the subject type, extended only by labels from existing
`%fast`-hint runes. It also provides a scoping mechanism which prevents user
code from altering kernel code registrations.

An additional advantage of this approach is its potential to fix the jet
mismatch of `+mink`, without requiring any injection of state. Presently, the
jet for `+mink` will not return stack traces from jetted Nock, though the hoon
implementation specifies returning all stack traces without regard to jets.

## Motivation

Currently Vere and Ares both handle jet registrations provided by `%fast` hints.
By convention and implementation, a `%fast` hint wraps the production of a core,
and registers that core's *battery* (axis 2) along with a registered hierarchy
of already-registered batteries which match a parent core, whose axis in the
newly-registered core is given in the hint. The label provided in a `%fast` hint
is appended onto the labels of the parent cores, producing a `$path` for each core
registered. This allows us to recognize cores as having a particular label. This
ability is fundamental to practical jetting systems.

To correctly implement core labeling with `%fast` hints, an interpreter must
maintain *state*. The state directly assembled from `%fast` hints is
conventionally referred to as the "cold" state (contrasted with the "hot" state
which is shipped with the interpreter binary and maps labels to jets, or the
"warm" state, the ephemeral join between hot and cold state).

(For a more thorough treatment of the current core-labeling and jetting system
see
["Fast Hints and Jets"](https://docs.urbit.org/language/nock/guides/jetting)).

Cold state is accumulated throughout the lifetime of the pier: once the `%fast`
hint wrapping the introduction of a core is evaluated, it is *gone* and cannot,
in general, be recovered. Therefore, in general, there is no safe way for the
interpreter to recognize that registrations can be deleted. The technical term
for such a design is a *memory leak*. (Thank you to ~fodwyt-ragful for this
insight.)

Further, it is not, in general, possible to assume the inter-pier portability of
core-based state machines (Arvo, Ares codegen, Gall agents, etc). The only way
in which this is possible at all is to provide the *introduction forms* (usually
typed as `(trap vase)` in Hoon) which will run the fast hints in the target
pier.

The practical implications of the above are that cold state is stored in
non-noun structures on the loom. There is no guarantee of that these structures
can be located or reused when migrating a pier between interpreters (e.g. Vere &
Ares). Therefore, the cold state cannot be migrated without either
interpreter-specific pier migration functions, or special introduction forms to
re-run the `%fast` hints and regenerate cold state. The useless existing cold
state may be permanently stuck in the loom as a memory leak.

A simpler, stateless approach is to embrace the referential transparency of a
declarative approach and simply state the necessary registrations when running
Nock. Being able to do so would avoid the necessity of the interpreter to
maintain state and ship introduction forms between piers. (Interpreters may
*cache* registrations and relations derived from them, but this is not necessary
for feasibility.)

## Specification

Nock interpreters SHOULD respect a dynamic hint labeled `%wild`, whose clue
molds to the `$wilt` structure as defined below.

```hoon
|%
+$  cape  $@(? [cape cape])    ::  noun mask; & means known, | unknown
+$  sock  [=cape data=*]       ::  core with mask; only & values need to match
+$  wilt  (list [l=* s=sock])  ::  list of labeled masked cores
--
```

`l` SHOULD be interpreted as a core label. Although `l` will in practice be a
`$path` (as it is now), we make no assumptions about what it is; it can be
anything that allows us to match known cores from inside a hint.

The template `s` SHOULD be interpreted as a noun template to be matched as
follows:

- If the `cape` is `&` then `data` is compared to the core and a match is
  returned if equal.
- If the `cape` is `|` then any noun matches the sock.
- If the `cape` is a cell, then matching is performed recursively
- If the `cape` of a `sock` is a cell but `data` is an atom, then the
  registration MUST be discarded for an invalid sock.

The list SHOULD be interpreted as the entire set of registered cores for the
enclosed Nock. A Nock interpreter will, at each callsite, check if there is a
label for the core to be fired. Semantically, each `$sock` in the list of
registrations is checked for a match against the subject (which in Hoon-emitted
code is a core). If a matching sock is found, then the label and formula are
checked against the interpreter's "hot state" (a mapping from labels and
formulas to actual jets) and the jet is invoked in place of direct evaluation of
the Nock.

If a match is returned, the interpreter SHOULD treat the matched core as having
the given label (`l`) for purposes of jetting and profiling (this label can be
used for anything, but these are the typical uses).

The registrations given in the `clue` SHOULD only be applied within the hinted
Nock. The clue formula MUST be a Nock 1 (constant).

## Rationale

The `%wild` hint contains exactly the same information as the cold state, but
takes the simple step of including the necessary slice of "cold state" *in the
Nock to be executed.*. It directly hints the computation to be performed, rather
than hinting the production forms of Nock we want hinted *everywhere*. This
trivially sidesteps all of the problems of state, both in the care required to
initialize *mutable state* by side effects of supposedly *immutable* programs,
and the necessity of indefinitely preserving that state. Notably, these slices
of "cold state" are also scoped, unlike `%fast` hints, thus leading to trivially
safe userspace jets.

In order to construct the `%wild` hint, we propose to use the `~%` (and `~/`)
Hoon runes both to produce `%fast` hints (for backwards compatibility), but also
to add labels to core types. This allows us to use all existing Hoon-level core
labels without modification.

A separate rune (`~.` is proposed) can extract core labels from the type of an
axis of the subject and only needs to be wrapped around *outer entry points*
(e.g. the outer arms of Arvo.) This composes the `%wild` hint from the Hoon type
of the given axis of the subject.

Thus, no relabeling of cores is necessary, the only Hoon level change is the
addition of a simple rune wrapping a fixed number of entry points to Arvo. Hoon
can compose the `%wild` hint's clue entirely from information tracked in the
subject type.

## Example

Consider the following jetted standard library (`vial.hoon`)

```hoon=
=>  ~%  %vial.100  %vial
~%  %one  +3..  ~
|%
~/  %dec
++  dec
  |=  a=@
  ?<  =(a 0)
  =|  b=@
  |-  ^-  @
  ?:  =(a +(b))  b
  $(b +(b))
--
```

The `%fast` hints on lines 1, 2, and 4 are compiled into Nock, but also result
in labels in the Hoon type. For the `+dec` gate, the core is labeled
`/dec/one/vial.100`.

Now consider the following trivial lifecycle door (`life.hoon`):

```hoon=
/+  vial
=>  vial
|_  many=@
++  this  .
++  peek
  |=  pax=*
  ?>  =(pax /how/<many>)
  many
++  poke
  |=  up=?
  ~.  +7..
  ^-  _this
  ?:  up  this(many +(many))
  this(many (dec many))
--
```

In this example, the `~.` rune would compile to a `%wild` hint with three
elements:

- `[l=/vial.100 s=[& %vial]]`
- `[l=/one/vial.100 s=[[& &] [<one battery> %vial]]`
- `[l=/dec/one/vial.100 s=[[& | & &] <dec battery> ~ <one battery> %vial]`

(In practice the `cape`s would be normalized by rewriting `[& &]` to `&`,
however here we leave them denormalized for ease of following the example.)

For the entire scope of the `~.` rune, a conforming interpreter would use this
as the set of registered cores in order to match jets or produce traces. The
list is extracted labels from the *type* of the first subhoon: `+7..` and
(recursively) the result types of any arms of any cores in the type.

## Bonus: fix `+mink` jet mismatch

There is a long-standing jet mismatch in `+mink`, stemming from the
functionality that `+mink` returns stack traces for failed Nock computations.
Any code run through `+mink` will obviously produce a shorter stack trace if it
contains jetted code, as the jetted code will avoid many of the sub-calls to
other Hoon functions. Normally, this wouldn't be an issue, since stack traces
are a side-effect for user convenience. However, since `+mink` makes the stack
trace a part of its return value, the exists a jet mismatch for `+mink`.

A further advantage to the `%wild` hint, as pointed out by ~master-morzod, is
that type-level availability of core labels could be used to fix this jet
mismatch in an ergonomic way. If the sample of `+mink` is extended to contain
jet registrations (in the same `$wilt` mold), its semantics can be fixed to
never produce a stack trace underneath a labeled core. The jet for `+mink` can
load the supplied `$wilt` as its local jet registrations, and the interpreter
can likewise refuse to produce stack traces under labeled cores, even if they
are in fact unjetted. Of course `+mink` should also explicitly handle the
`%wild` hint.

A vase-mode wrapper around `+mink` can then extract the necessary registrations
from the type carried by the vase, using the same algorithm as for compiling
`~.`, but at runtime. The extraction would almost certainly need to be
persistently memoized for reasonable performance.

## Backwards Compatibility

Interpreters are free to ignore `%wild` hints and use existing jet registration
implementations, such as cold state derived from `%fast` hints. One bonus is
that the changes to the type system will allow `%fast` hints with bad parent
indexes to be validated at compile time. However, the extant `+mink` jet
mismatch will remain.

## Reference Implementation

A full reference implementation is not offered, as it would entail changes to
the hoon compiler and both runtimes. However, the added case required in the
type `$type` of Hoon types and an overview of its introduction and elimination
follow.

The type `$type` of Hoon types is extended with one case:

`[%wilt p=path q=@ r=type]`.

It is introduced by the `~%` rune (to which `~/` reduces). When typing
`~% p q r s` (where `h` contains the AST children)

- Type `s`, call it `ts` and verify that it types to `%core`. Otherwise fail.
- Mint `q:s`, call its `tqs` and verify that it types to `%wilt`. Otherwise
  fail. Call its nock `nqs` and verify that it is `[1 0]` or `[0 <axis>]`.
  Otherwise fail.
- Produce the result type as follows: `[%wild [p.h p.tqs] +.nqs ts]`.

This both records the labeled core hierarchy in the type, and simultaneously
checks the consistency of `~%` core labeling *as part of Hoon typechecking*.

TBW: extract core labels by traversing type, producing socks for cores, and
recursively `mint`ing arms of cores.

TBW: should the `$wilt` of a nested `%wild` hint concatenate onto or replace the
`$wilt` of the other `%wild` hint?

## Security Considerations

Jet registration obviously implicates security. There is an obvious improvement
in the current proposal over stateful jet registration in that an obvious
scoping mechanism exists, and that user code has no possible mechanism to to
alter registrations for kernel code.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
