---
uip: "0130"
title: Content Addressable Networking
description: Enabling content-addressable networking in the Urbit ecosystem
author: ~hastuc-dibtux
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Kernel
created: ~2024.8.10
requires: UIP-0113
---


## Abstract

This proposal introduces a mechanism for content-addressable networking on top of the previous directed messaging proposal (UIP-0113).

## Specification

### Message Structure

Building on the structure of UIP-0113, we define an overlay namespace atop the existing directed messaging protocol. Content addressable %peeks are used to request data from this namespace, and are structured as follows:

- The ship is always `~zod`
- The path is the content-addressable hash of the data, prefixed by the hash algorithm used, e.g. `/blake3/0xdead.beef.1234.5678`

Content addressable %pages are used to respond to these requests, and are structured as follows:

- The ship is always `~zod`
- The path is the content-addressable hash of the data, prefixed by the hash algorithm used, e.g. `/blake3/0xdead.beef.1234.5678`
- The authenticator is empty
- All other fields are as defined in UIP-0113

Because content-addressing does not allow for data to retain names across versions, we disallow the sending of content-addressed %pokes.

### Routing

Ships participating in the content-addressable overlay network MUST be reachable via the directed messaging protocol. The directed message protocol MUST be used to co-ordinate the distributed hash table that underpins the content-addressable overlay network. 

## Motivation

Content-addressable networking enables a variety of new use cases, including:
- Anonymous data
- Deduplication of data that is bound across multiple paths
- Bittorrent-style swarms

### Anonymous Data

Referencing data by hash allows for the creation of anonymous data structures, where the creator can remain anonymous. This is useful for a variety of use cases, including:
- Overlaying other hash addressed networks, such as IPFS
- Most applications of Byzantine-fault-tolerant networks (i.e. blockchains), require some form of hash addressing that the urbit network now gives you for free.

### Deduplication of Data

By allowing for the creation of content-addressed data structures, we can globally deduplicate data that is bound across multiple paths. This improves scale for hosting providers.

### Bittorrent-style Swarms

Bittorrent-style swarms are very easy to implement on top of content-addressable networking. This has the potential to further improve network scaling, by allowing for the distribution of data across multiple peers. Moreover, once the spine and signature are fetched from a specific peer, the rest of the content can be retrieved from other peers in the swarm. This is akin to fetching a torrent file, and then fetching the actual content from other peers. This gives you the benefits of content-addressable networking, without abandoning named data.


## Backwards Compatibility


This proposal does not introduce any backwards compatibility issues, so long as UIP-130-aware clients have sponsors that are also UIP-130-aware. In fact, this proposal could be soft-forked in without co-operation. 

## Security Considerations

Needs discussion, however content addressed data has less security considerations than named data, as it is impossible to rename a piece of content-addressed data.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
