---
uip: "0111"
title: Desk Publisher Switcher
description: Allow desk publishers to tell subscribers to switch to a new source for updates.
author: ~tinnus-napbus
status: Shipped
type: Standards Track
category: Kernel
created: 2023-07-28
---

## Abstract

Allows app publishers to send a poke to all those subscribed for desk updates
requesting they change the source of updates to a new ship/desk. Such requests
are recorded in kiln's state, and the recipients can then approve or reject
them. Upon approval, all existing syncs from the the old ship/desk will be
changed to sync from the new ship/desk. This allows app publishers to more
easily migrate the distribution ship.

## Status

This UIP was released in 411k, but the functionality is not yet exposed through 
`%landscape`. The PR for this work can be found [here](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/pull/6780).

## Motivation

If you're currently distributing an app from ship A and want to change to ship
B, you have to try and tell everyone to manually switch. Alternatively, you can
push an update to your app that pokes kiln to perform this action in
`++on-load`. Both are inconvenient for the app publisher.

For example, the Foundation wants to consolidate app distribution to a star
from the multiple ships that Foundation-developed apps are currently
distributed from. Or, an app developer started off distributing apps from their
personal ship or moon but want to switch to a star.

## Specification

Three pokes are added to kiln:

- `%kiln-jump-propose`: A publisher can propose a switch of update source for
- subscribers of a desk. Kiln will scry Clay for `%w` `%sing` subs to `let+1`
- for that desk, then send all those ships a `%kiln-jump-ask` poke, asking them
- to switch.
- `%kiln-jump-ask`: This is a request to switch update source from ship/desk A
  to ship/desk B. It can either come from the existing update source ship or
  from `our`. The request will be added to the new `hop` `(map dock dock)` in
  kiln's state, and can then be approved or rejected.
- `%kiln-jump-opt`: Approve or reject a jump request. Upon approval, all syncs
  from the old ship/desk will be switched to the new ship/desk.

A `/x/kiln/jumps` scry endpoint is added to retrieve the map of pending
source change requests. A `%watch` path of `/jumps` is also added to get
updates of new requests & approvals/rejections. The data type returned
by both is defined in `/sur/hood.hoon`:

```hoon
::  $jump: changes to update source change requests
::      
+$  jump
  $%  [%all all=(map dock dock)]        :: pending requests
      [%add old=dock new=dock]          :: new request
      [%yea old=dock new=dock]          :: approved
      [%nay old=dock new=dock]          :: denied
  ==
```

A `%kiln-jump` mark is added for this with a json conversion method so
front-ends can subscribe or scry for such requests and ask users to
approve. The `%kiln-jump-opt` mark also has a conversion method from
json so front-ends can approve/reject.

Four generators are also added:

- `|jump/propose`: publisher can propose a source switch to subscribers
- `|jump/approve`: subscribers can approve jump requests
- `|jump/reject`: subscribers can deny jump requests
- `+jumps`: list pending jump requests.

## Rationale

Kiln indirectly handles subscriptions via Clay, so it's not possible to simply
get a list of kiln subscribers. Scrying Clay for `%w` `%sing` subs to `let+1`
could theoretically capture subs that aren't from kiln, but that shouldn't be a
problem because if those ships don't have kiln subs the poke just won't do
anything.

Initial implemenation proposed automatically switching source upon
request, but after discussion it was determined the user should have to
approve the requests, hence the storage of requests in state & the
approval/rejection process.

## Backwards Compatibility

If ships are behind on OTAs and don't support the pokes, they just won't
be switched, so it's no worse than the current situation. This would
only be a problem after initial release, eventually all ships will catch
up.

## Reference Implementation

[https://github.com/urbit/urbit/tree/desk-publisher-switcher](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/tree/desk-publisher-switcher)

## Security Considerations

The initial trust issue of automatically switching has been resolved by
requiring approval.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
